\section{Introduction}
This document specifies the 'Coordinated Hydra Head' protocol to be implemented
as the first version of Hydra Head on Cardano - \textbf{Hydra HeadV1}. The
protocol is derived from variants described in the original paper
\cite{hydrahead20}, but was further simplified to make a first implementation on
Cardano possible.

Note that the format and scope of this document is (currently) also inspired by
the paper and hence does not include a definition of the networking protocols or
concrete message formats. \todo{Add: network specification (message formats)} It
is structured similarly, but focuses on a single variant, and avoids
indirections and unnecessary generalizations. The document is kept in sync with
the reference implementation available on Github~\cite{hydra-repo}.
\textcolor{red}{Red} sections indicate that they are currently not covered or
missing in the implementation, where \textcolor{blue}{blue} parts mean a
difference in how it is realized.

First, a high-level overview of the protocol and how it differs from legacy
variants of the Head protocol is given in Section~\ref{sec:overview}. Relevant
definitions and notations are introduced in Section~\ref{sec:prel}, while
Section~\ref{sec:setup} describes protocol setup and assumptions. Then, the
actual on-chain transactions of the protocol are defined in
Section~\ref{sec:on-chain}, before the off-chain protocol part specifies
behavior of Hydra parties off-chain and ties the knot with on-chain transactions
in Section~\ref{sec:offchain}. At last, Section~\ref{sec:security} gives the
security definition, properties and proofs for the Coordinated Head protocol.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "main"
%%% End:
