---
slug: 25
title: | 
  1. Offline mode
authors: []
tags: []
---
## Status
N/A

## Context

Currently, the Hydra CLI requires a Layer 1 Cardano node running in order to operate; The L1 node is needed to submit and watch for L1 transactions. Generally speaking, the transactions watched are for learning the state of peer Hydra nodes. The transactions submitted are to transition between states (e.g. after submitting a Commit tx to the L1, a node watches to see when all other nodes have also Comitted.)

There are applications for the Hydra node where interaction with a Layer 1 chain is unnecessary. Sundaeswap is developing the Gummiworm protocol, a Layer 2 rollup chain for Cardano. Gummiworm intends to have dedicated "validator node" entities, that validate & challenge the full history of transactions for a given Layer 2 Gummiworm session. These validator nodes don't need to connect to any peers, and each will be driven by a single client. SundaeSwap intends to use modified Hydra nodes, running in offline mode, to act as these validator nodes. SundaeSwap intends to upstream the offline mode patches to mainline Hydra.

The hydra-node offline mode would remove the dependency on the L1 Cardano node, for applications like Gummiworm where it is unneeded. This would be useful for other Layer 2s that build on top of Hydra instead of duplicating its efforts, and for anyone who wants to easily validate a set of Cardano transactions.

## Decision
Hydra CLI will be executable in offline mode, as an alternative to the default online mode. When online, the Hydra node depends on querying a Cardano node for Era History information and Genesis paramters. In offline mode, this information will instead be supplied via two sub-arguments to the offline-mode parameter, which each specify the path to a JSON file.

Commit actions will not fail due to insufficient resources on the L1 chain, and may be used to specify the initial L2 UTXO state.

A node running in offline mode will not be able to switch between offline and online modes once started, as it is an unlikely use-case that would likely add more complexity. The Era History and Genesis file options will be required only in offline mode, and unusable in online mode.

To minimize programmer error, unsupported actions in offline mode will make the Hydra reply with CommandFailed events. This includes contesting.
<!---
--TODO: full list of unsupported actions
commit and fanout i think are both necessary, to start/end lifecycle
-->

There will be a new command to connect to a Layer 1 Cardano node, download, and serialize the Genesis parameter and Era History Interpreter files necessary to run the Hydra in offline mode. These files can be cached between Hydra L2 sessions, or replaced as often as desired.

## Consequences

The Hydra node would become usable offline, for transaction validation, and other custom L2 applications. The lifecycle & state machine associated with a Hydra would remain unchanged in both online, and offline mode.

Some changes or additions to the Hydra node's client API would complement the new offline mode, especially for its application in L2 networks. SundaeSwap intends to follow this proposal up with a persistence and API proposal, which will upstream some of those changes.