---
title: May 2023
slug: 2023-05
authors: [ch1bo, pgrange, ffakenz]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since April 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

This month we released version 0.10.0 which includes many important features.
The project [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21) was
only slightly updated this month and already saw one more feature completed:

![](./img/2023-05-roadmap-ex-ideas.png) <small><center>The roadmap without idea items</center></small>

#### Release 0.10.0

- First mainnet compatible release of `hydra-node` including technical changes and documentation

- Mainnet exposure currently limited to 100â‚³ per participant

- Added some missing features to the client API (short-term solutions)

- Some quality of life improvements in running the `hydra-node`

- [Full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.10.0) and list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/8?closed=1)

#### Notable roadmap updates

- Got new input and concrete scenario for benchmarking (off-chain) performance
  of a Hydra Head. As it is a very basic one, we conretized the item from an
  idea to a feature and started work on it.

- Added a new feature item to add Hydra as tool to developer platforms within
  our agenda of [promoting Hydra as an open-source
  platform](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/monthly/2023-01#themes-for-2023)
  for scalability on Cardano.

- Already completed a first feature for 0.11.0 and considering to release it as
  early as possible with latest advances.

![](./img/2023-05-roadmap.png) <small><center>The latest roadmap with features and ideas</center></small>

## Development

[Issues and pull requests closed since last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-04-26..2023-05-24)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Timed transactions [#196](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/196#)

To realize the Hydra Head protocol, a `hydra-node` observes and follows the
chain progress on the layer 1 (L1). Until now, this component was only observing
protocol related transactions. Now, on every block roll forward, a `Tick` event
carrying the notion of time from L1 is observed by the `hydra-node` and is used
to validate transactions in a Hydra head. This means that clients can submit
time bounded transactions to an open head and expect them to be validated using
the same slot that would be used on L1. It is important to mention, that time
only advances on L1 when a block was produced.

![](./img/2023-05-timed-transactions.jpg) <small><center>Timed transactions in a Hydra Head state channel</center></small>

This feature will make the Hydra L2 ledger now en-par with UTxO features
available on the Cardano L1. A logical next step in this direction could be to
make time in the state channel advance every configured `slotLength` (e.g. every
second) using the system clock in between blocks as a form of [dead reckoning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_reckoning).

#### Removing --ledger-genesis [#863](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/863)

The hydra-node was taking two command line options to configure the ledger used
to validate transactions on layer 2: `--ledger-protocol-parameters` and
`--ledger-genesis`. The former is quite self-explanatory the Cardano protocol
parameters which shall be used. Often the same as on the layer 1 are configure,
or similar parameters with less fees for example. The second option however, was
requiring the `genesis-shelley.json` as used for the cardano-node used to
initialize the shelley era back in the day.

When we started using the current slot in the L2 ledger (see above), we realized
that only the start time and slot length are effectively used from that
configuration file. Moreoever, it would be quite surprising if those are
different and slots would be longer or shorter on L2 (unless explicitly
configured). We opted to remove the option alltogether and have the `hydra-node`
fetch the genesis parameters from the Cardano network. This makes the system
easier to configure and more isomorphic.

#### Improving CI runtime

The hydra project [embraces Test Driven Development](./adr/12) and our code is
quite covered, at several level. You may already have seen our test pyramid.

![test pyramid](./img/2023-05-test-pyramide.png) <small><center>Testing pyramid</center></small>

Although we expect the tests to be executed locally on developers' machines, we
also implement a [Continuous
Integration](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/workflows/ci.yaml),
checking all these tests still pass and more.

This is fine until you realize that your C.I. can take as long as an hour or
more and it has subtle implications on your workflow. A first, obvious, impact
for us is that we want all our branches to be [fast-forward with
master](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/wiki/Coding-Standards#merge-prs-with-merge-commits-and-rebase-branches-on-top-of-master)
before merging them. In practice, imagine your pull request is all green,
everybody approves it and all the tests pass but it's lagging a bit behind
master. You'll have to rebase your branch and wait for C.I. to prove it still
works before merging. Know imagine your C.I. takes an hour or more and you have
more than one branch to merge... you can always feel it, don't you?

So let's see what's going on there and let's take a look at this run from [may
the 10th](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/4933005294):
- Building and testing takes 19 minutes for the longest
- Generating haddock documentation and running the benchmarks takes 28 minutes
  for the longest
- documentation (which will need artifact generated in previous steps) will take
  14 minutes
- In total, this run took 1 hour and 16 minutes.

Our first focus has been on the build and test stage. We're expecting the
plutus-merkle-tree to run fast but [it took 8 minutes and 52
seconds](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/4933005294/jobs/8816564512)
and if we look in detail, we can see that 7m and 11 seconds have been spent
setting up the build environment. Stated otherwise, 81% of the build time is
downloading binary dependencies from some nix cache. How can we reduce the size
of our dependencies?

If we want to compile our code and run the test, we need cabal and other nix
dependencies that will download _the world_ before doing anything. But what if
we decide to, straight on, run the test with nix and let it decide what it needs
to compile because, maybe, most of our code did not change, the test binary is
already available in some cache and we just run it!

This what we did in [#867](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/867).
Merging this P.R. the [build on master took 45
minutes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5003046049) and,
specifically, the same [plutus-merkle-tree
job](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5003046049/jobs/8963773583)
only took 1 minute and 44 seconds, only 20% of the time observed before.

Then we decided that we wanted to spend less time on documentation (14 minutes,
remember). It happened that most of the time spent by this process is web-site
optimization. That's fine for master because we want to publish an optimized
web-site. But what about all the builds in branches for which the web-site will
never be published? We need to keep this documentation step in branches because
it also provide us security by checking that we didn't introduce too much mess
in the doc, like broken links, for instance. But we definitely got rid of the
optmization step.

That is what we did in [#880](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/880)
and it helped up [save 10 minutes from this
step](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5067084637/jobs/9098252031).

Our first goal was to reduce coninuous integration execution time when pushing
on branches and this has been improved. We're now having execution time
significantly under 30 minutes where it used to be 45 minutes or event an hour.

We had some issue with compilation output, swallowed by nix, which have been
solved by [#889](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/889).

Every morning, we rebuild our master branch and we can observe the whole
execution time on the following graph (in seconds):

![CI perf](./img/2023-05-ci-perf.png) <small><center>C.I. execution total execution time</center></small>

Although we got performance improvement on branches C.I. execution time, we
don't observe so much benefit when we look at execution time on master. We can
save some time on the documentation step because, after all, we don't care about
optimizing the web-site for the unstable version to probably save 10 minutes.
But what's more problematic here is the process variability.

This variability can be explained by nix cache misses. That's something we need
to investigate. It's hard to optimize a process with buffer and we do have quite
some buffer in place here and in case of a cache miss, it means we have to
recompile everything and it happens that compiling takes time for us. So every
cache miss introduce several minutes of overhead which explain why we observe so
much variations between two days with this master excution time.

Next steps:
- Why do we have random cache miss that we do not expect?
- Improve haddock generation time (15 minutes)
- reduce bench time (we probably don't want to run the whole benchmark suite for
  every single commit, or a smaller one)
- focus on changed area (do not compile everything to generate the monthly
  report)

## Community

#### Hydrozoa [#850](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/discussions/850)

This month, the project saw a new kind of contribution from the community.
@GeorgeFlerovsky has written a research piece about an adaptation of the
(Coordinated) Hydra Head protocol into a new flavor - Hydrozoa. The article is
currently getting examined and [discussed on
Github](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/discussions/850). Feedback so
far has been positive. Of course, one does not simply change the Hydra Head
protocol (pun intended), but the ideas contained could drive evolution and
followed-up with concrete protocol extensions. Very much like the ideas
presented in the original paper.

#### Hydra for Payments project update

In this collaborative effort between IOG and ObsidianSystems, we are pushing the
frontiers of using Hydra in payment use cases. It will lower the entry barrier
for developers and ultimately users to leverage the Hydra Layer 2 for sending
and receiving ADA and Cardano native assets with very low fees and sub-second
finality.

The project is in it's second phase where the open-source
[hydra-pay](https://github.com/obsidiansystems/hydra-pay) library is getting
expanded with necessary features while the team pushes for a building a
dedicated mobile application.

With the recently released hydra-pay version
[0.2.0](https://github.com/obsidiansystems/hydra-pay/releases/tag/v0.2.0), an
end-to-end workflow of the Android App nick-named "HydraNow" can be realized.
This app will act as a layer 2 wallet quite like a Bitcoin Lightning Wallet and
drives feature development in both, `hydra-pay` and `hydra` in the background.

![](./img/2023-05-hydra-now.png) <small><center>Two instances of HydraNow (in browser) connected via a hydra-pay channel</center></small>

#### Spanish translation

Last, but not least, we would like to thank @Agustinblockchain for their
contribution of a [Spanish translation
#866](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/866) of the [hydra.family website](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/unstable/es/) ðŸ‡ªðŸ‡¸ ðŸŽ‰

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for May was held on 2023-05-24 via Google Meet with
these [slides][slides] and here is the [recording][recording].

TODO...

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1anUC3Z1idloyR6uwiSHLZtV6-LQvUcByHPMUgCBOVIA
[recording]: https://hydra.family/TODO
